You might change your goals if you're
attaining, right? But listening, it's
like listening to the undercurrent. That
can feel scary, terrifying, right? That
that speaks back to, oh gosh, if I start
to attune to what is really really true
underneath for me. Yeah. Oh, what does
that mean? You're I mean, the threat is
your whole life might change.
[Music]
Welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore living the life you
want with enjoyment and ease. I'm Tara
Howley and today I'm here with Janine
Parziali, one of our lead facilitators
and I'm so excited to have her on the
episode and introduce you all to her. Hi
Janine, welcome. Hi Dara, very excited.
So I want to start out with just the
most basic question which is what the
heck is attunement?
What is attunement? That's a great
question. I see attunement as um a
mixture of deep active listening
connection connection to self. So if I'm
attuning to someone else I'm not leaving
myself. I'm actually deeply connected to
myself, listening to myself and like
tuned in like a radio station to me and
tuned in like a radio station to the
person. So, it's this very deep back and
forth movement where I'm not abandoning
myself. I'm right here with someone else
in a deep listening on multiple levels.
So like just active listening I might
just hear the words but if I'm attuned
listening I'm hearing what's under the
words. I'm hearing um that there might
be grief under what a person is saying
or sadness or
anger. Tuning into the the emotional
qualities of a person, the physical
qualities, how someone's using their
hand, the intellectual quality, sharp
mind or open mind.
um in tuning into the wholeness of a
person from my wholeness.
Wow, that was a lot of different layers.
It felt like I just dove down a
well. It's clear you've been soaking in
this for a long time
yourself. Um there are a couple of
pieces of that I want to highlight. One
part is when you said abandon yourself.
You don't want to abandon yourself in
it. What does that mean? Well, if I'm
just listening to you and hanging on to
every word you say, there's a way I can
leave myself to catch your words, maybe
I'm afraid I'm going to miss what you
said or the importance. But if I'm not
abandoning myself, if I'm staying with
myself, I I might be hanging out in my
body with my mind, with my heart, with
my gut. So I'm in here listening to what
you say, occupy, inhabiting, inhabiting
my body, my core, my heart, my head, my
gut, my wholeness, my whole body. I feel
warm when you say that like coming home
to myself in it. Yes. Yeah. Very much at
home in myself. Yeah. So what are the
signals then? What are the signals that
I am attuning that I'm attuning to
myself? For instance, for me, one signal
and when I see other people, if they're
leaning really forward, they've often
left a part of themselves. Likewise, if
someone's really leaning back, you see
this in some like when people are
listening to lectures a little
skeptically and they're leaning way
back, kind of squinting, it's like, oh,
they're they're trying to get safety or
distance themselves from something and
in doing so, they've left themselves or
abandoned a part of themselves. A kind
of disconnection. A kind of
disconnection.
So attunement is a deep twoway
connection.
And so what's the value of
that? I I think I want that. Maybe I
want that.
Well, first stage value would be this is
something that parents do with infants.
And so attunement is learned really
young. And in um the therapy language,
this is where we first hear it as
attunement. So a mom knows when a baby
cries, oh, they need something. She
might not know what, but it's like
change diaper, teething, hunger, sleep.
So attunement is also
needsbased. Um so the earliest is in
listening to something that maybe can't
tell you with direct language what it
needs. That would be first kind of first
level of operations. Second, as we get
older, attuning I can attune to a
friend, and a friend might be telling me
like, "I'm really busy right now. I
can't talk." And I can take that at face
value. Okay, goodbye. Or I can hear,
"Oh, there's stress under their words."
And I can say, "Okay, I totally get it.
You take care of you." And just know I
love you. Like I can attune there's
something else going on. I'm not going
to pry because they have made it clear
they don't want it. They have a
boundary, but I'm going to attune to the
other thing going on. In likewise in
relationships, a partner might get
really gruff with us or might be
suddenly cold and distant and we could
take it personally. But if we attune to
them, if we're listening to them from
the head, the heart, and the gut, from
our own bodies to theirs, we can get a
sense of like, oh, they had a hard day
at work or, oh, something there's
something cooking over there. I don't
know what, but something else is going
on. and I can just stay available and
supportive to that or go get grounded
myself. And in work, we we can do it. If
a team is if something's happening in a
team, you can just yell at a team, hit
your goals. Or you can attune to a team
and actually, okay, what makes it that
we didn't hit goals this month? What's
going on? You can attune to the team and
to actually solve and figure out what
the real issue is. So, I hear attunement
as this whole other layer. There's the
layer that's the content layer or the
information layer and attunement is
listening taking that in, absorbing that
and also being there with this
underneath layer like you've called it
the secondary process I think before
secondary. Yeah. Right. the words, the
the logistics would be the first
process. And then there's what's going
on underneath
emotionally, physically, energetically,
what maybe it's subconsciously that a
team doesn't even know is happening. Oh,
we have to change our sales cycle. And
the team, you know, knows something
isn't working, but they haven't been
able to name exactly that. I'm realizing
it has something uh to do with the way I
feel about intuition. Like, oh,
attunement and intuition feel very
linked. Very linked. I would say
intuition is a byproduct of attunement
to self. So there's attunement to self.
What's the attunement with another look
like? Yeah. So I'd say that's where
attunement starts is being here, being
in with ourselves, with our heart, our
gut, our head, our body. And from here
listening, tuning in to the person we're
with. So I can tune in to you physically
like, oh, Janine just nodded her head
and she's laughing and smiling. Oh,
there's like a delight of, "Oh, I'm
being in a self-consciousness. Oh, I'm
being tuned into like delight for sure."
And I can just notice all of those
physical um things that I see. And then
I can tune into the emotional life under
the movement.
Feels so good to be attuned to and
scary. What is up with that?
Yeah. Yeah. I I think it's because we
are being deeply seen when we're attuned
to. Yeah. Beyond the level of ego,
beyond this idea of who we think we are.
It's one of the byproducts of attunement
is that we get to meet someone in a
totally different way. It definitely
invites me into a feeling of my
own I'm going to use the word truth
here. Yeah. Yeah. Like what's really
authentic? A tuning. When you're tuning
to me, it invites me also to really
look, oh to be with me. Oh gosh. Oh my
gosh. I'm delightful. Yeah. I'm
delightful and I'm being seen. Oh dear.
Oh dear. Yeah. Uhhuh.
Yeah. Yeah. So it is hot. It is I mean
hot like Yeah. Like being seen is
incredibly vulnerable.
It's an incredibly vulnerable act to be
attuned to. And it feels like when you
say this, it's coming from a place of
attuning to another from the heart. And
when you're speaking about it, it's from
the heart. From the heart. But I can
attune from the gut, too. And I can
sense um like, oh, the fears and the
life story and the
needs. The deepest level of attunement,
I think, is tracking needs to needs. You
can attune to my gut from your gut. From
my gut. My needs from your needs. It's
that's how that works. That well said.
Yes. In that sense, it feels like an
invitation like I'm getting invited to
connect that way to be with that and
there's a dance to it. Oh to totally. It
is not a oneway. It's a it's a back and
forth and it's a it's fluid. It's
movement. It's shifting every second.
And you've had experiences of how this
has shifted I don't know relationships
or impacts in companies. I'm curious to
hear a couple of those stories.
Um, well, the one that comes to mind
first is my dog because this just
happened. Yes, I've been hiking a lot
and I was taking a hike with him. It had
just rained. We were in deep mud and we
were going down a steep trail. It wasn't
even a trail at that moment. It was just
a mud patch and he got excited and he
started running and I yelled, "Stop."
And he he stopped, but then he started
freaking out and he started jumping on
me and muddy paws all over me and my
hiking kit. And I was getting annoyed
and I was like, "Oh, come on. No, no,
no. And I wasn't using any of my normal
language with him. And I had yelled at
him, which has he's this is a dog who
has had um lots of cuddles and very
little yells in his life. And at some
point I was like, why is he misbehaving
in this mudfield? I was like, oh, I
yelled at him. He's scared. Like we lost
our connection. And I bent down towards
him in the mud and I was like, "Oh, I'm
sorry, buddy." Like I yelled. I was
really scared I was going to get pulled
into the mud and fall over and we have
another two miles to get out and I'm so
sorry and we're okay and we're safe and
I'm right here with you now.
And almost instantly his behavior
changed. His nervous system regulated.
We got up and we hiked down the muddy
field. No pulls like my normal wonderful
obedient well obedient
dog. So attuning to him regulated his
nervous system and my nervous system.
Um, so it's a two-way street. That would
be with my dog. Um, with kids, I had an
experience where our daughter had
surgery the other day and I was in a
business meeting, but I I answered the
phone and I could hear her go, "Mom." I
was like, "Uhoh, something's going on
here." And I stepped into the bathroom
because I was attuning to her below like
what was going on emotionally. And I got
into the bathroom and she was like, "It
was really hard. the doctor wasn't
attuned to me and it hurt and the
novocaane didn't work and and I just sat
and listened to her and I was like, "Oh,
that [__] sucks." Part of attunement
can be reflecting what you hear or see
and just reflected to her what I was
hearing and compassionately reflecting
and then then she let me know when she
was done. She's like, "Okay, I'm okay
now. Mom's got to go." I think she so
attuning um can be a way to regulate
either person's nervous system. I heard
that regulate and and also not need to
fix it. No. Yeah. I mean, especially as
a parent when a kid is 2,000 miles away,
it's impossible to fix it. And Yeah. and
and knowing that she can take care of
herself. I think she just needs to be
attuned to for for literally I was in
the bathroom for maybe three minutes.
Wow. Oh gosh. That's the kind of thing I
could imagine, especially being a kid
that was at times needy for attunement
or attention would have just kept
looking for it, kept talking and talking
and wanting it. I could see, oh, if I
got actually attunement, maybe just
three minutes would have been perfect.
And the irony, so parents, don't get
excited that you'll give them three
minutes and it'll be done. If you f when
you first start attuning to kids, it's
like they have a hungry well that has
been waiting to be filled. So, I didn't
start doing this with Esme till she was
three and it was like she was a sponge.
So, there was a lot that happened at
first and now she's like, "Yep, three
minutes done. Got what I needed. Thanks,
Mom." So, it can work in any level of
relationship. These are really personal
relationships but business too.
Absolutely. Uh so working in a company
recently I watched an engineering team
and a design team. They're tackling the
same problem from two different
perspectives but they were in constant
fighting because they weren't attuned to
each other. They weren't listening. They
weren't listening to what the real
problems each each team was having. So
they could not come to a um solution
that solved everybody's needs. and just
sitting and like, "Okay, can you hear
what they're actually saying the design
criteria needs to have?" And they could
like, you know, when the engineering
team could hear what the design team
needed and the design team could attune
to themselves, figure out, oh, what this
is, we're trying to say it needs to be
user friendly and aesthetically look
like this. When they could figure that
out and then attune to the engineering
team, they could come up with a
solution. But when they were not
attuning, when they were not listening
actively and connecting with what was
going on under the frustration that was
under the words, they couldn't come up
with a
solution. Very cool. If you told Janine
in her 20s that she would be interested
in something like attunement, I think I
would have just said that sounds too
soft
of an idea. That doesn't doesn't sound
like anything concrete.
Yeah.
And what I cannot deny is the huge
impact it has had on all of my
relationships. It has seeped into kind
of every corner of both and I include in
that my relationship with myself.
How has it changed a relationship? You
know, I I feel more grounded in who I am
and I and that means I show up more
confidently. I don't doubt what I have
to say. right now I'm not uh
predetermining something. It's just
here. It's just with us, right? And
that's really fun. So, it's brought more
fun to my life, more aliveness to my
life and more confidence, that kind of
sense of my own truth. Like I get to be
more me
and that's really precious. I think I
used to attune as a child from a place
of leaving myself, right? going out to
to make myself safe, to make it
okay. And what we are talking about here
has something more to do
with something that feels very
nourishing at its root. Mhm. It does
feel deeply nourishing. Yeah. And I'll
say a personal byproduct I've
experienced is there's actually less
noise in my head. Yeah. It's like a
counterintuitive thing, but it's like,
oh, I used to like circle in my head.
Oh, what if I did this? Oh, I did this.
I shouldn't have done that. Oh, and it
was just constant chatter going on. And
the more I was actually being with
myself, the quieter that got. I was able
to listen to quieter whisper wants and
those intuition. I could hear like, oh,
gut, like something isn't working here.
And when there was all the noise in my
head, I couldn't hear the, "Oh, this
doesn't work for me. I don't know why. I
don't know what it is, but I'm going to
stay with this sense." until I
understand it or I feel pulled towards
this person or this thing or doing this
and I don't know why. It's
counterintuitive. It doesn't make any
logical sense, but I'm going to I'm
going to stay tuning into this until I I
get more information.
It it reminds me of the question of
like, well, so how would attunement help
me achieve my goals? Yeah. Right.
Well, exact exactly that way. um you
might change your goals if you're
attending, right? But listening, it's
like listening to the undercurrent like,
"Oh, um I said that I wanted to have 40
coaching clients by the end of 2026."
And if I'm attuning to myself, might be,
oh, I actually don't want 40 coaching
clients. I want 20 deeply fulfilling
coaching clients that I feel really um
connected to. Or it might be for me as I
was attuning to myself, I had a full
roster of coaching clients and I started
hearing I want to I want to teach and
hold groups and that the more I listened
to it, the more it became like a gong
gong gong and I had to change my career
goals and then I could pursue them
through listening. Okay, what's the
first step I want to make? What's the
next step I want to make? Right. That
can feel scary. Terrifying, right? That
that speaks back to, oh gosh, if I start
to attune to what is really really true
underneath for me. Yeah. Oh, what does
that mean? You're I mean, the threat is
your whole life might change.
And the promise.
Still scared, Tara. Still scared. Yeah.
Yeah.
terrifying. You're right on track.
Yeah. There's also an attunement that
can happen even if I'm moving fast when
we facilitate together. We have to move
quick and there's
something there's something great about
getting to attune even when we're fast.
I don't even know how it fully works.
What happens when you're attuning and
moving fast? Great question. If I'm
deeply attuned to my body, I can move
faster. If I'm not attuned to my body
and I'm moving fast, I will literally
stub a toe or trip or break something or
drop an important ball, you know,
facilitation ball or something. But if
I'm attuned to myself, then I'm not
going to go any faster than my system
can actually go. And so I'm going to not
drop as many balls. I'm not going to
break something. I'm not going to stub
my toe. There's a delay. For me, there's
a a factor of delight in attunement.
It's like, "Oh, is that this tempo
delightful?" And this worked. I noticed
hiking, like, you know, I've been doing
all of this hiking recently, and there
were times when we really had to book to
get back by sunset, and it was like I
could feel the pace where, oh, if I from
tuning into my body and the earth and
the slipperiness of the rocks, this is
the pace I'm safe at. I could tell from
attunement just that where that edge
was. And if I go a little over like,
nope, I'm afraid I'm going to twist an
ankle at that pace. Right here, this is
my pace. It's a real acceptance in that.
The zone of tolerance comes up for me.
Flow comes up for me. Like these are all
sort of in the same in the same area.
Yeah. In the same boat, this connection,
listening, active listening, presence,
flow. No, I love I love digging up on
all of this. So I I have had personal
experiences of being being attuned to
can actually entirely shift the the
tenor of a fight or an argument. And
I've had this experience where Joe and I
were fighting over something. I was
doing a piece of theater. This is in our
late 20s, early 30s, and I hadn't done
theater for a couple years. Like I would
move to LA. My life had been very dry.
I'd been struggling struggling. And I
got my first gig. And it was a just a
one-day reading. And he couldn't make
it. He didn't make it. And I came home
livid. Like, what? You don't care about
me? You don't care about my work. You
don't like theater. This is the thing I
love more than anything in the world.
Like, I had all these stories and I was
just And he was just like, "Oh, I want
to hear. I want your whole self is
welcome here. Your anger's totally
welcome." And it was like, and then I
think I let him have it for a minute.
This is before we really learned great
skills. So, I like took my anger out on
him. And he's like, "Yeah, what else do
you want to tell me?" And he just stayed
attuned to me. like he could feel the
hurt and the fear underneath it. Like,
oh, does my partner and I could then
find the hurt and the fear. Like, does
my partner not care about my career?
Does my partner not like theater and not
care about this art form? Like, I could
get to the fear and the hurt under my
anger.
And it totally changed our um our fight
in that moment. And that's happened
numerous times throughout our lives
together.
Yeah. What? That is the the thing I had
to come up immediately was. So, how do
you remind yourself to attune? Because
gosh, if my partner started to just come
at me all of a sudden, I think I would
also just be like, "All right, we're in
it. Let's go." Right. How do you stay
attuned in the face of anger? Well, I
think baby steps practicing practicing
attunement first. Like, what is it to um
drive staying attuned to yourself and
the surroundings as you drive? What's it
like to scroll on the computer attuned?
You might find you might not scroll so
much. So, I'd say the first thing is
just practicing and really developing
that muscle. And you can practice it
anytime. Stopped at a car. Oh, where are
my feet? Where are my hands? Car just
stopped at a stop sign. There's my
breath. All right. Baby steps. Baby
steps. Building up to like, oh, how to
remember when a partner is angry at you.
My guess is you're going to forget the
first 20 times, and that's totally okay.
And being compassionate. And I like to
have um visual cues. So it's like, oh,
if fights, if your fight, if you're
going to if your partner, if it's going
to happen in the kitchen, have a little
sticky note on the fridge or in the
bathroom or on your computer. If your
boss is going to get angry about
something, maybe it's a um a phone thing
that pops up every four hours like, "Oh,
have you attuned to yourself?" And then
um and then you start practicing like,
"Oh, right. Here we are. We're having
this loaded
conversation. Can I attune to myself and
then come to my partner or what do
there's simple hacks to like like what
do I need right now can be an
intellectual way into attunement. If I'm
too disregulated, what do I need right?
I needed a breath. I need a sip of
water. I need a minute to regulate. What
do they need right now? Once I'm
regulated, what do they Oh, they need I
don't know what they need. Okay, just
ask. What do you need? M back to what do
I need? Oh, that's so simple. I love the
two questions. What do I need? I like
the I need first. Y that going to that
little relief. It keeps coming up in
both of us. The
really nice. It feels really good. And
then the like parasympathetic nervous
system calms down and then instantly I'm
here. I'm so curious though. So, what
makes it that we don't attune more if it
feels so good? Yeah, it's a great
question. I think most of us myself I
can speak for myself I was not raised
with parents who knew how to attune and
that's no no fault of theirs their
parents didn't attune you know the
generations of people who didn't know
how to attune so getting attuned to I
think is a really rare quality
so it's it's rare in that we didn't have
it so and we're now it's the invitation
is we get to try it on yeah like if you
didn't grow up speaking Russian how
would you know to speak Russian right If
you didn't grow up speaking attunement,
how would you know to attune?
So simple. So I mean it is really
simple. It's nothing no fault. Nobody's
fault. My own upbringing is one where I
think I was a very sensitive kid and
being um I mean sensitive in certain
ways of like I I didn't feel comfortable
in my own body like you know like you
get awkward and so actually coming back
home or inhabiting the body
is it's almost like going back to
something that feels quite uncomfortable
and then finding my way home slowly in
that. So it is it has been a real
process.
Um yeah, that's an important point
because I think sometimes when we first
start attuning to our hearts it grief
might come up. I actually learned this
from I had a teacher who was like I
spent all this time meditating,
listening to my heart. I was like that
sounds cool. Um so I'd come and listen
to my heart and tears would spring every
single time and I had to go through like
I I consider it housekeeping. I would
just sit and cry every time I attuned to
my heart. And then I had to like all
sorts of gunky emotions came up. So I
think sometimes we avoid the body
because it's housing
um grief that we haven't finished
processing. So a question I imagine a
lot of folks would ask is well but how
do we get other people to attune to me
the way we want? Like my partner, my
boss, whoever. I want more attunement.
How do I get that to happen? God damn
it. Attune to me. It's not working. Why
aren't they
I'll say what not to do. Do not demand
attunement. It's probably not going to
work, but go ahead, try. Um I I always
think that if there's something we want
from our partners or our kids, our
community, our friends, if we do it and
practice it first, um is the fastest way
to get it. We can't ask for something
that we're not ready to offer. Or it
would be sort of kind of weird to say
like like attune to me. I'm not gonna
attune to you, but attune to me. But if
I practice attuning to my partner or I
practice attuning to my friend group or
my parents or my company
um often without even knowing what
they're doing, people will start a
tuning back because you it's like a it's
like a tuning fork or you know if you've
tuned an instrument resonance they
resonate right or someone's like that
looks delicious. What's that? They might
even ask but the act of attuning
increases more attunement increas the
reson it resonates with people
but I don't want to do it first Tara
they owe me I'm resentful yeah yeah
great attuned to that resentment who
that yeah
baby and that is the thing I hear with
my clients most of the time is like I
don't want to do it first well what
would happen if you did it first. What
part of your
um story would you have to let drop away
to do it first? Yeah, it's
confronting, humbling. There's something
vulnerable in that act, right? Often I
think I don't I don't want to do it
first is a very young part of us that
needed to get attuned to that is still
sort of needing it to come from
something bigger than us that hasn't
healed. So, it's like, oh, if they give
it to me, then I'm going to get that
thing I needed when I was little. I'm
going to get that need met which
actually isn't going to get it met. So
my last question
is what has to fall away like on the
identity level what has to fall away in
order to
attune? I think in
attunement our idea of who we are falls
away. Oh, I'm a woman. I'm 54 sitting in
a chair in Santa Rosa. Um but but in a
in deep attunement, I'm tuning
into the parts of me that are under that
identity, under my ego identity. Um even
tuning into things that might not have a
name that make
sense. And I'm doing that with someone
else, tuning in below ego
identity. And so it's like the story of
who I am falls away a little bit. the
story of who someone else is falls away
so that I can meet
um more of me, more of
them. I can meet something e more
ephemeral,
um universal, interconnected, humane,
humane.
I imagine there's a way that we could
just begin the practice of how would I
begin noticing attunement to self? Yes.
Yeah. jump in. Should we do an exercise?
Let's do it. Let's do it. So, we'll go
to like the simplest a simple simple
exercise. And I would encourage everyone
to put two hands
together. And so, put your hands
together, palm of hand on palm of hand,
and bring your attention to your hands.
And just notice mine are a little sweaty
and
damp, which if I'm attuning to myself, I
could go, "Oh, I might be a little
nervous doing this."
And then just notice what's the
texture of your two hands
meeting. What's the
temperature? How do they
feel? Maybe how do they feel in your
fingers? And how do they feel around
your
palms? Just letting all your awareness
come down to your hands and seeing what
you sense.
That would be a very simple act of
attunement, somatic
attunement, hand to hand. You could take
that another step and bring your
attention to your breath. And just close
your eyes for a
minute and notice your
breath. You might even notice your
thought. You might have had the thought
of like, oh man, are we going to our
breath again? Jesus. Right. Great.
That's a tuning to a thought. And then
come and bring your attention to your
breath. And just notice like, oh, your
chest
expands perhaps when you
breathe. Perhaps your belly
expands. See if you notice how the air
comes through your nostrils or your
mouth. What What's its temperature?
Breath can be one of the simplest way if
we come down and listen attune to our
breath can be the simplest way to start
to come to our internal world our our
inner
body. And from here go like 3.0 owe it.
Bring your attention to your heart and
that could be your whole kind of chest
area, lungs, upper
torso. And you can notice your breath
moving through that heart
area. Maybe you notice your breath, your
chest expanding and contracting.
And maybe you notice something else
going on around your heart. Maybe you
notice some tension or muscular tension
or heart
ache or your own heartbeat. You can even
put your hand right on your heart center
chest
area and let your hand attune to the
movement of your chest. Feeling your
chest
move and let your heart attune to the
warmth of your hand. Can it feel the
warmth of your palm? How much can it
feel
it? And sometimes when we come and
attune to our hearts, some people will
have emotions arise and little tears
will spring to the
eyes. I like to think of it as house
cleaning.
or any emotion. This the heart center is
the center of emotions and our
love. So again in attuning you're just
listening and being with whatever comes
up. Not trying to change it. Just noting
and being with it.
This would be a very simple act of
attuning to the heart. And you can do
that with all part. You could attune to
a hand, to your feet, to your gut.
Terra, it was so yummy. I felt like
downregulated and
calm. Thank you so so much. I'm glad we
got to do this. Me too. It's total joy,
Janine. Thank you.
[Music]